feat(l10n): add graphql transformers and `localize` (#1885)
commercetools/merchant-center-application-kit: packages/l10n/README.md

    {
      locale: 'en',
      value: 'Milk',
    },
  ];
}
```

To distinguish these in the source code of the Merchant Center, we name the graphql shaped value `LocalizedField`. When executing `transformLocalizedFieldToLocalizedString`, we transform the graphql shaped value to the HTTP API shape.

#### Example usage

```js
const product = {
  nameAllLocales: [
    {
      locale: 'en',
      value: 'Milk',
    },
  ],
};
const transformedName = transformLocalizedFieldToLocalizedString(
  product.nameAllLocales
);
console.log(transformedName);
// { en: 'Milk' }
```

#### When to use it

This transformation tool will be helpful when you consume the commercetools platform `/graphql` in conjunction with `apollo` and build form views consuming `@commercetools-frontend/ui-kit`.

Given that you consume:

- commercetools platform `/graphql` API
- [`LocalizedTextInput`](https://github.com/commercetools/ui-kit/blob/master/packages/components/inputs/localized-text-input/src/localized-text-input.js)

This will be helpful transforming data from `response -> view`.

```js
// fetching product from commercetools platform graphql API
// returns a product with a `nameAllLocales`

> const fetchedProduct = useQuery(ProductQuery, {

Reviewer: Maybe `useMcQuery`?

  // [{ locale: 'en', value: 'Milk' }] -> { en: 'Milk' }
  name: transformLocalizedFieldToLocalizedString(fetchedProduct.nameAllLocales),
};

// finally, we are ready to render out LocalizedTextInput with a correctly transformed `name` value.
return <LocalizedTextInput name="name" value={transformedProduct.name} />;
```

### `injectTransformedLocalizedFields`

In the example above, we demonstrated that you can transform `LocalizedField -> LocalizedString` for a field returned by the commercetools platform `/graphql` API.

However, given that a Resource can have multiple values of the type `LocalizedField`, this can a cumbersome task to do.

So we offer `injectTransformedLocalizedFields` that is meant to transform multiple values.

#### Example usage

```js
const product = {
  nameAllLocales: [
    {
      locale: 'en',
      value: 'Milk',
    },
  ],
  descriptionAllLocales: [
    {
      locale: 'en',
      value: 'This is milk',
    },
  ],
};
const fieldTransformDefinitions = [
  {
    from: 'nameAllLocales',
    to: 'name',
  },
  {
    from: 'descriptionAllLocales',
    to: 'description',
  },
];
const transformedProduct = injectTransformedLocalizedFields(

>   fetchedProduct,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  product,
```

  fieldTransformDefinitions
);

console.log(transformedProduct);
// { name: { en: 'Milk' }, description: { en:  'This is milk' } }
```

#### Slight difference to `transformLocalizedFieldToLocalizedString`

> Unlike `transformLocalizedFieldToLocalizedString` where you pass in the `LocalizedField` value,
> we need to pass the entire Resource and the `fieldTransformDefinitions`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike `transformLocalizedFieldToLocalizedString` where you pass in the `LocalizedField` value, we need to pass the entire Resource and the `fieldTransformDefinitions`.
```

Then extract the data and copy the `core` folder to this package, and rename it to e.g. `cldr-v35`. Then point the `cldr` library to the folder location.

Run the script, which uses the new data.

## Utils

### `transformLocalizedFieldToLocalizedString`

> Transforms a `LocalizedField` to a `LocalizedString`

#### Context

Amongst [Common Types](https://docs.commercetools.com/api/types) in the commercetools platform API, we find [`LocalizedString`](https://docs.commercetools.com/api/types#localizedstring) type.

The `LocalizedString` is a type reserved for values found in a [Resource](https://docs.commercetools.com/api/types#referencetype), for example `Product`:

```js
// Product
{
  // `name` is a `LocalizedString`
  // as defined by https://docs.commercetools.com/api/projects/products#productdata
  name: {
    en: 'Milk';
  }
}
```

The documented `LocalizedString` in [https://docs.commercetools.com](https://docs.commercetools.com/) is a specification of the HTTP API.

> In the commercetools platform `/graphql` API, we also find `LocalizedString` value takes a different shape of the same name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, the commercetools platform `/graphql` API represents the `LocalizedString` in a different format as a list, for technical reasons.
```

Author: Will update when we find consensus about `transformLocalizedFieldToLocalizedString` :)
thanks for the suggestion

Then extract the data and copy the `core` folder to this package, and rename it to e.g. `cldr-v35`. Then point the `cldr` library to the folder location.

Run the script, which uses the new data.

## Utils

### `applyTransformedLocalizedFields`

> Transforms multiple `LocalizedField` -> `LocalizedString`, given `fieldNameTransformationMappings`

#### Context

Amongst [Common Types](https://docs.commercetools.com/api/types) in the commercetools platform API, we find [`LocalizedString`](https://docs.commercetools.com/api/types#localizedstring) type.

The `LocalizedString` is a type reserved for values found in a [Resource](https://docs.commercetools.com/api/types#referencetype), for example `Product`:

```js
// Product
{
  // `name` is a `LocalizedString`
  // as defined by https://docs.commercetools.com/api/projects/products#productdata
  name: {
    en: 'Milk';
  }
}
```

The documented `LocalizedString` in [https://docs.commercetools.com](https://docs.commercetools.com/) is a specification of the HTTP API.

> However, the commercetools platform `/graphql` API represents the `LocalizedString` in a different format as a list, for technical reasons.

Reviewer: By technical reasons you mean constraints in how we can represent something like it in a GraphQL schema?

Author: the suggestion came from here
https://github.com/commercetools/merchant-center-application-kit/pull/1885#discussion_r527623681

in hindsight, I prefer the previous description. it's all technical and there is no need to be transparent about limitations

```js
// Product, returned from the `/graphql` API of commercetools platform
{
  nameAllLocales: [
    {
      locale: 'en',
      value: 'Milk',
    },
  ];
}
```

To distinguish these in source code of the Merchant Center, we name the graphql shaped value `LocalizedField`. We offer `applyTransformedLocalizedFields` that is authored to transform these values from one to the other.

#### Example usage

```js
const product = {
  nameAllLocales: [
    {
      locale: 'en',
      value: 'Milk',
    },
  ],
  descriptionAllLocales: [
    {
      locale: 'en',
      value: 'This is milk',
    },
  ],
};
const fieldNameTransformationMappings = [
  {
    from: 'nameAllLocales',
    to: 'name',
  },
  {
    from: 'descriptionAllLocales',
    to: 'description',
  },
];
const transformedProduct = applyTransformedLocalizedFields(
  fetchedProduct,
  fieldNameTransformationMappings
);

console.log(transformedProduct);
// { name: { en: 'Milk' }, description: { en:  'This is milk' } }
```

#### When to use it

> This transformation tool will be helpful when you consume the commercetools platform `/graphql` API in conjunction with authoring views consuming `@commercetools-frontend/ui-kit`.

Reviewer: Nit maybe state in a way that is is generally simpler to work with a keyed object than a list of localized values.

- [`LocalizedTextInput`](https://github.com/commercetools/ui-kit/blob/master/packages/components/inputs/localized-text-input/src/localized-text-input.js)

This will be helpful transforming data from `response -> view`.

```js
// fetching product from the commercetools platform `/graphql` API
// returns a product with a `nameAllLocales` and `descriptionAllLocales`
const product = useMcQuery(ProductQuery, {
  context: GRAPHQL_TARGETS.COMMERCETOOLS_PLATFORM,
});

// Given that LocalizedTextInput accepts a value of `{ [key: string]: string }`,
// we tranform our product to match the required shape
const transformedProduct = applyTransformedLocalizedFields(
  product,
  fieldNameTransformMappings
);

// Finally, we are ready to render our form with the correctly shaped `name` and `description`
return (
  <>
    <LocalizedTextInput name="name" value={transformedProduct.name} />
    <LocalizedTextInput
      name="description"
      value={transformedProduct.description}
    />
  </>
);
```

### `formatLocalizedString` (DRAFT)

> Transforms a `LocalizedString` to a String

The `formatLocalizedString` util is a util we use internally inside the Merchant Center.

> This util is at the moment subject to change, hence marked as Draft. Use with caution in your Custom Application.

Reviewer: "use with caution" can be quite unclear. Means not use? Use in a specific way or just that we may take liberty to change it which you should be aware of when using it?

Author: > we may take liberty to change it which you should be aware of when using it?

this.

Author: on hindsight, it doesn't make sense to mention this at all.
It is marked draft, and it should be clear enough.

If anything, we leverage further changes that affects consumers as breaking changes, which in turn are documented. I'm removing this

#### Context

As discussed under `applyTransformedLocalizedFields`, a `LocalizedString` is a value type reserved for a `Resource`, e.g a `Product`.

```js
const product = {
  name: {
    en: 'Milk',

>     de: 'Milsch,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    de: 'Milch,
```

Author: I'm getting german class... but no remark on the missing `'` :trollface:

  },
};
```

When rendering a Product in a view, we would like to render the value of a localized string field, such as `name`, given the selected **data locale** of the UI.
The **data locale** is a value controlled by the Merchant Center User (MC User) by changing the **data locale switcher** in the top bar of the Merchant Center. The list of available options is derived by the list of languages specified in the project. The selected value can be read from the **application context**.

> However, there might be a case where the selected **data locale** does not match any of the localized string values. In this case, it would be helpful to display a "fallback" value using the `formatLocalizedString` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, there might be a case where the selected **data locale** does not match any of the localized string values. In this case, it is recommended to display a "fallback" value using the `formatLocalizedString` function.
```

> The `formatLocalizedString` util is authored with a couple of things in mind:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `formatLocalizedString` util is authored with the following in mind:
```

1. Help us Custom Application developers remain resilient as we attempt to derive a value of `LocalizedString` given a specified locale.
2. Help us Custom Application developers remain consistent when rendering a value derived from `LocalizedString`.

> Let's take a look at the examples below to put this to action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let us take a look at the examples below putting this to action.
```

#### Example usage

All examples below will use the following `Product`:

```
const product = {
  name: {
    en: 'Milk',
    de: 'Milch,
  }
}
```

##### Scenario 1

Given that selected **data locale** of `de`

```js
const translatedName = formatLocalizedString(product, {
  key: 'name',
  locale: 'de',
});

console.log(translatedName);
// 'Milch'
```

##### Scenario 2

Given that selected **data locale** of `sv`

```js
const translatedName = formatLocalizedString(product, {
  key: 'name',
  locale: 'sv',
});

console.log(translatedName);
// 'Milk (EN)'
```

> **What happened?**

Reviewer: Kudos to this section. Very tasty!

> Our product has no value for the selected **data locale** `sv`. The `formatLocalizedString` function selects the "next available value" from `product.name`, in this case `en`, and returns it with a hint `(EN)` that this value refers to another locale.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our product has no value for the selected **data locale** `sv`. The `formatLocalizedString` function selects the "next available value" (more details on the order below) from `product.name`, in this case `en`, and returns it with a hint `(EN)` that this value refers to another locale.
```

##### Scenario 3

Given that selected **data locale** of `de-AT`

```js
const translatedName = formatLocalizedString(product, {
  key: 'name',
  locale: 'de-AT',
});

console.log(translatedName);
// 'Milch'
```

**What happened?**

Our product has no matching value for the selected **data locale** `de-AT` but we still got `"Milch"`.
This is because `formatLocalizedString` attempts to determine a **primary language tag** on the option `locale` and match that to the available values. Given that `de` is a [primary](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IETF_language_tag) of `de-AT`, it determines that this is the _closest available value_ from `product.name`

#### Fallback

> Given that `formatLocalizedString` can not handle all scenario exemplified above, we can specify a `fallback` as a last resort:

Reviewer: Got confused by "not all cases above". I felt it handles all cases we talk about above. So for me this here is another case we tackle. Hence a suggestion if I got that flow right. 

```suggestion
To provide even more freedom beyond cases mentioned above the `formatLocalizedString` allows specifying a `fallback` as a last resort:
```

```js
const translatedName = formatLocalizedString(product, {
  obj: product,
  key: 'name',
  locale: 'sv',
  fallback: '-',
});
```

The default value of `fallback` is a `""`.

#### Fallback order

In **Scenario 2** above, we discussed that `formatLocalizedString` will pick the "next available value" from `product.name` when there is no matching value. In our case, the next available value was the locale `en`.

> As Custom Application developers, it is possible for us to take control of the "next lookup" of the value, when there is no match (before `formatLocalizedString` proceeds to rendering what is specified as `fallback`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Custom Application developers can take full control over the order of attempted lookups of the value while there is no match. Before `formatLocalizedString` eventually proceeds to rendering what is specified as `fallback`.
```

`formatLocalizedString` accepts `fallbackOrder`, and this [test exemplifies the use case and resolve](./src/localize.spec.ts#L151:L170).

#### When to use it

> Given that we want to render `LocalizedString` of a given `Resource`, it is sensible to rely on `formatLocalizedString` in conjunction with the Application Context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given that we want to render `LocalizedString` of a given `Resource`, it is sensible to rely on `formatLocalizedString` in conjunction with the Application Context. A user usually has a defined preference of languages we can use. 
```

- The commercetools platform `/graphql` API
- [`LocalizedTextInput`](https://github.com/commercetools/ui-kit/blob/master/packages/components/inputs/localized-text-input/src/localized-text-input.js)

This will be helpful transforming data from `response -> view`.

```js
// fetching product from the commercetools platform `/graphql` API
// returns a product with a `nameAllLocales` and `descriptionAllLocales`
const product = useMcQuery(ProductQuery, {
  context: GRAPHQL_TARGETS.COMMERCETOOLS_PLATFORM,
});

// Given that LocalizedTextInput accepts a value of `{ [key: string]: string }`,
// we tranform our product to match the required shape
const transformedProduct = applyTransformedLocalizedFields(
  product,
  fieldNameTransformMappings
);

// Finally, we are ready to render our form with the correctly shaped `name` and `description`
return (
  <>
    <LocalizedTextInput name="name" value={transformedProduct.name} />
    <LocalizedTextInput
      name="description"
      value={transformedProduct.description}
    />
  </>
);
```

### `localize` (DRAFT)

> Transforms a `LocalizedString` to a String

The `localize` util is a util we use internally inside the Merchant Center.

> This util is at the moment subject to change, hence marked as Draft. Use with caution in your Custom Application.

Reviewer 2: Do you intend to export this? If so, you forgot to export it.

Author: it is exported now

#### Context

As discussed under `applyTransformedLocalizedFields`, a `LocalizedString` is a value type reserved for a `Resource`, e.g a `Product`.

```js
const product = {
  name: {
    en: 'Milk',
    de: 'Milsch,
  }
}
```

> When rendering a Product in a view, we would like to render the value of `name` given the `language` of the UI.
> The `language` is a value controlled by the Merchant Center User (MC User) by updating the language switcher on the Application Bar of the Merchant Center.
> 
> The language switcher emits a value that is intended to help us Application Developers display the Resource data (`Product` in our example) in the specified language. Given that the `product.name` has a value of the specified `language`, we can easily pick the value from the `product.name`.
> 
> However there are scenarios where the MC User updates the language switcher to a value that our Product example has no matching value. What then? This is where `localize` plays its role.
> 
> The `localize` util is authored with a couple of things in mind:
> 
> 1. Help us Application Developers remain resilient as we attempt to derive a value of `LocalizedString` given a specified language.
> 2. Help us Application Developers remain consistent when rendering a value derived from `LocalizedString`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When rendering a Product in a view, we would like to render the value of a localized string field, such as `name`, given the selected **data locale** of the UI.
The **data locale** is a value controlled by the Merchant Center User (MC User) by changing the **data locale switcher** in the top bar of the Merchant Center. The list of available options is derived by the list of languages specified in the project. The selected value can be read from the **application context**.

However, there might be a case where the selected **data locale** does not match any of the localized string values. In this case, it would be helpful to display a "fallback" value using the `localize` function.

The `localize` util is authored with a couple of things in mind:

1. Help us Custom Application developers remain resilient as we attempt to derive a value of `LocalizedString` given a specified locale.
2. Help us Custom Application developers remain consistent when rendering a value derived from `LocalizedString`.
```

Let's take a look at the examples below to put this to action.

#### Example usage

All examples below will use the following `Product`:

```
const product = {
  name: {
    en: 'Milk',

>     de: 'Milsch,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    de: 'Milch,
```

  }
}
```

##### Scenario 1

> Given that specified `language=de`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Given that selected **data locale** of `de`
```

```js
const translatedName = localize({
  obj: product,
  key: 'name',

>   language: 'de',

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  locale: 'de',
```

});

console.log(translatedName);

> // 'Milsch'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// 'Milch'
```

```

##### Scenario 2

> Given that specified `language=sv`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Given that selected **data locale** of `sv`
```

```js
const translatedName = localize({
  obj: product,
  key: 'name',

>   language: 'sv',

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  locale: 'sv',
```

});

console.log(translatedName);
// 'Milk (EN)'
```

**What happened?**

> Our product has no value for the specified language `sv`, what `localize` will do for us as Application Developers is _pick the next available value_ from `product.name`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our product has no value for the selected **data locale** `sv`. The `localize` function selects the "next available value" from `product.name`, in this case `en`, and returns it with a hint `(EN)` that this value refers to another locale.
```

##### Scenario 3

> Given that specified `language=de-AT`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Given that selected **data locale** of `de-AT`
```

```js
const translatedName = localize({
  obj: product,
  key: 'name',

>   language: 'de-AT',

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  locale: 'de-AT',
```

});

console.log(translatedName);

> // 'Milsch'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// 'Milch'
```

```

**What happened?**

> Our product has no value for the specified language `de-AT` so there is no match, but we still got `"Milsch"`.
> This is because `localize` attempts to determine a **primary language** on the input `language` and match that to the available values. Given that `de` is a [primary](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IETF_language_tag) of `de-AT`, it determines that this is the _closest available value_ from `product.name`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our product has no matching value for the selected **data locale** `de-AT` but we still got `"Milch"`.
This is because `localize` attempts to determine a **primary language tag** on the option `locale` and match that to the available values. Given that `de` is a [primary](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IETF_language_tag) of `de-AT`, it determines that this is the _closest available value_ from `product.name`
```

#### Fallback

Given that `localize` can not handle all scenario exemplified above, we can specify a `fallback` as a last resort:

```js
const translatedName = localize({
  obj: product,
  key: 'name',

>   language: 'sv',

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  locale: 'sv',
```

  fallback: '-',
});
```

The default value of `fallback` is a `""`.

#### Fallback order

> In **Scenario 2** above, we discussed that `localize` will pick the _next available value_ from `product.name` when there is no matching value. In our case, the next available value was `en`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In **Scenario 2** above, we discussed that `localize` will pick the "next available value" from `product.name` when there is no matching value. In our case, the next available value was the locale `en`.
```

> As Application Developers, it is possible for us to take over control of the next "lookup" of the value, when there is no match (before `localize` proceeds to rendering `fallback` ).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As Custom Application developers, it is possible for us to take control of the "next lookup" of the value, when there is no match (before `localize` proceeds to rendering  what is specified as `fallback`).
```

`localize` accepts `fallbackOrder`, and this [test exemplifies the use case and resolve](./src/localize.spec.ts#L151:L170).

#### When to use it

Given that we want to render `LocalizedString` of a given `Resource`, it is sensible to rely on `localize` in conjunction with the Application Context.

```js

> import { Text } from '@commercetools-frontend/ui-kit';

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import Text from '@commercetools-uikit/text';
```
